# Balanced K-way Sort Merge

You are to write java program(s) to carry out an external balanced sort merge, following the specification given below.  There are three levels of difficulty.  For a maximum of 80%, you may just implement a balanced two-way sort merge with fixed length initial runs.  For an extra 10% (90% of available marks) you must implement the replacement selection strategy either for variable length initial runs or for merging runs at higher orders of k.  For the last 10% (i.e. 100% of available assignment marks) you must complete both of the replacement selection strategies (i.e. variable length runs, and run merging for 1 < k < 16). 
<br><br>
The work is to be done individually, written in Java that compiles and runs on the R Block linux lab machines.  Some largish text files will be provided, but students are encouraged to test on other inputs.  Programs must only use standard input and standard output. (For example, if using linux, just "cat" a file ... then pipe its output with the "|" operator into your program, and then redirect output using the ">" operator to save it.  Specific examples are given in the specification, below.) 
<br><br>
You are sorting lines of text input.  Each line of input is one datum, and the Java string compareTo() method decides the order.  That is, if you have one line, s1, and another line, s2, then their output sorted order is defined as follows:  if s1.compareTo(s2) returns a negative number then s1 comes before s2 in an ordered list; and if it returns a positive number then s1 comes after s2; and if it returns 0 then they are identical strings.  We are sorting all input lines into ascending order. (N.b. do not use ==, > or < for string comparison!!)

## Specifications

1. You are sorting text files, and each line is one datum.  That is, if you input two entire lines of some book then they are compared using the Java string compareTo() function, treating each line as if it was [say] a  single entry in a dictionary.  You are not sorting words or letters or numbers .... you are sorting entire lines, comparing one line with another.  This is just like the Linux "sort" command.  For this assignment, uppercase letters differ from lowercase ones.

2. Be careful when reading text files using a method like readLine() because different operating systems and applications may use different control character combinations to indicate end-of-line, and the specific reading method may throw out the actual end-of-line marker(s) used in the input file and substitute its own perferred one when outputting.  You need to guard against this so that the size of the sorted output is the same as the original input ... no lost characters. (see https://stackoverflow.com/questions/42769110/keep-new-lines-when-reading-in-a-file as an example starting place to achieve this).  You may wish to try writing a simple "copy text file" java program to make sure your I/O methods don't lose anything.

3. You must write java code to take plain text input and produce initial runs, and then you must write code to subsequently perform a balanced k-way sort merge on those initial runs.  These are two separate program classes, called MakeRuns.java and MergeRuns.java, respectively.

4. MakeRuns accepts a command-line argument of the form -hH, where H is the maxsize of the heap to be used to make each run.  Each run is created using heapsort (but for the extra 10% variable-length run solution, use replacement selection as well), and is written to standard output.  As an example on linux, if I have a text file called MobyDick.txt in the same directory as my program, then I would enter "cat MobyDick | java MakeRuns -h128 > init.runs" to create the initial runs and place them in the file "init.runs".  This allows you to separate the problems of creating runs and merging them.  (init.runs and MobyDick should be exactly the same size if you haven't lost any data.)

5. MergeRuns accepts a command-line argument of the form -kK, where K is the number of runs to be merged at a time (i.e. the number of temporary files for input to a merge, and the same number again for output.)  Note that this program must first distribute whatever runs are found in "init.runs" into the K initial temporary files.  As an example, "java MergeRuns -k7 > final.txt" will use a balanced 7-way merge on the runs found in init.runs and then redirect the final sorted run as standard output into a new file called "final.txt". That is, the last pass produces one sorted run.  The penultimate merge phase may have fewer than K input runs.

6. For the 80% solution, K can only ever be 2, and any other value entered can be ignored and treated as 2.  Otherwise, for advanced solutions, it must satisfy 1 < K < 16, allowing a 2-way to 15-way merge (i.e. including anything inbetween).

7. Obviously we all have huge machines with plenty of memory for sorting, so H and K could be alot bigger than the limits specified here.  But, for the purpose of this assignment, we aim to have code that can run on just about any size of machine.  We will pretend we have quite small memories and limited file systems for testing purposes.  Therefore, your heapsize for initial run creation must satisfy 32 <= H <= 2048.  If a value for H outside of this is given in the commandline argument, make it default to 256.  To check that your solution follows the spirit of the assignment, your program should work just fine with the memory heap limited to just about exactly what H and K dictate, so don't assume there is any additional memory available for anything. (see https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E92519_02/pt856pbr3/eng/pt/tsvt/task_AdjustingtheJVMHeapSize-c07fd1.html?pli=ul_d96e123_tsvt)

8. Modest documentation should be included in your source code, along with good header documentation that says what the class does, how it is expected to be used, and who wrote it (including ID number) and when.  If any external help was obtained or any AI used then a note to this effect should be included in the header documentation as well, indicating where the help came from and what it was.  Note that it is okay to get some help, provided it is credited to the correct source. Although, obviously you can't get another person to write any of your code

## Submission

Submit a compressed folder containing all your source code (n.b. no big data files) and a README.txt file with instructions on how to use your code and any other information you want the marker to know about.  Make sure you include your name and ID numbers in the documentation of each code segment, and in the README.  The folder name should be your SID#.  Make it plain which solution you are going for (80%, 90%, or the whole enchilada).
<br><br>
Procedure: Create an empty folder whose name is your student ID.  Copy only source code and README into it (i.e. no compiled code or sample data or anything else).  Compress it and submit via Moodle.  